Let's contemplate the word enough, because I think it will play an important role going
forward
When I watch the news or scroll my feeds, I keep coming back to the same questions
Why, despite all our knowledge and innovation, do problems like poverty and pollution keep
plaguing humanity?
Why, despite astonishing advances in renewable energy and resource efficiency, is fossil
fuel use at an all-time high, as is our global ecological footprint?
And why, despite being responsible for the main part of that footprint, have rich countries
been experiencing stagnating, if not decreasing, well-being?
I'm a sustainability researcher with a background in econometrics, and I believe the answer
lies in the fact that solving poverty, caring for nature, or fostering well-being is not
the ultimate goal of our current economic system
Its goal is growth
Many take this for granted, but growth wasn't considered a moral goal for most of history
It was only officially measured around the middle of last century, through GDP
It then shifted into the core of our economic thinking, and from there into policymaking
and our collective psyche
Growth became synonymous with progress
Things went fast after that
Extinction rates went up, resource use and waste exploded
Some warned early on about the dangers of exponential growth on a finite planet
In 1972, a team of MIT scientists created a first-of-its-kind world model consisting
of over 200 interconnected variables
With it, they analyzed a question I mentioned earlier, why problems like poverty and pollution
persist
They published a book on their findings called The Limits to Growth, in which they warned
that continuing the business-as-usual growth pursuit would lead to societal breakdown
setting in around now
Breakdown doesn't mean the end of humanity, but a steep decline in well-being nonetheless
The book was a bestseller, but you may have never heard of it
The authors were derided as doomsayers, and their message over time buried
A few years back, I compared their now decades-old projections with what's happened since
I found empirical data closely aligning with the model's business-as-usual scenario, which
shows growth grinding to a halt around 2040 or so, followed by steep declines in things
like food production and well-being
My analysis also revealed that this breakdown could be avoided by letting go of the growth
pursuit and redirecting resources to meet human needs and protect nature directly
This indicates that what we do in the next few years will determine our well-being for
the rest of this century
And this now-or-never moment in history is up to us
Technology by itself will not save us
Despite aspirational talks of decoupling, the idea that the economy can grow without
resource use and pollution growing along with it, there's no decoupling
Certainly not for a full impact on the earth
Raw materials consumption has been around 1.2 kilograms per dollar GDP for two decades
while biodiversity loss, water scarcity, plastic pollution are all worsening
But even just considering carbon emissions, which per dollar GDP have decreased, sufficient
absolute decoupling, which is what we need, is nowhere in the data
Our choice isn't whether to keep growing or not
It's whether the end of growth will come by design or disaster
Either we choose our own limits or we'll have them forced upon us
Now that humankind has reached global, unparalleled power, limits to growth confront us with a
question we've never faced before
Who do we want to be?
And what world do we want to live in?
Here's where enough comes in
If I were to describe the Montauri need in the 21st century with one word, it would be
enough
Enough as in no more
This is the limit, say, a planetary boundary
And enough as in sufficient, juxtaposing it to this exhausting grind for ever more and
instead invoking a notion of sharing, as in enough for each
I believe the only realistic plan to avoid breakdown and maintain global well-being lies
in this mindset shift, from never enough to enough for each
Change the goal of our economic system from growth to human and ecological well-being
A well-being economy
What would that look like?
We have an idea because we already pretend that's what we have
No vision statement reads, a world where growth perpetuates at all costs indefinitely
It talks about how this organization contributes to society, because that's what we feel it
should do
In a well-being economy, business activities, government policies, and citizen behavior
are aimed at meeting our physical, social, and spiritual needs within planetary boundaries
It doesn't mean we're anti-growth
It just means we're more selective about it
We differentiate between what should and should not grow, depending on whether it contributes
to well-being
This implies different pathways towards a well-being economy for low- and high-income
countries
At small material footprints, growth more often correlates with well-being, including
through poverty reduction
So, poorer countries, below their share of earth-carrying capacity, may still need green
growth, economic expansion driven by clean technologies
In richer countries, what has decoupled from growth is happiness
So, they can and should focus on reducing ecological footprints to sustainable levels
while safeguarding everyone's livelihood by sharing more equally
Let me stress, because I hear this misconception a lot, decentering growth doesn't mean shrinking
the economy until it crashes
It means reducing our environmental impact to within a safe operating space for life
as we know it
That's not going back to a poorer past
That's changing the forward direction away from a cliff
We'll still have houses with fridges, good schools, health care, profitable businesses
We'll go to jobs and parties
But social norms and economic dynamics will change
We'll redefine what has value, or what work we call productive
With our needs securely met, this tradeoff between social and environmental benefits
which we often take as given, dissolves
Sharing more equally means less income and wealth inequality, improving social cohesion
and reducing wasteful, conspicuous consumption
Efficiency gains are used to work less instead of produce more
By not pursuing growth at all costs, we can avoid a lot of costs, like all the expenditure
on health care and cleanups due to pollution
Moving to a post-growth society isn't choosing permanent recession
It's flexing our free will to change our notion of prosperity from evermore to better
How probable is this economic transformation?
It's feasible. That's half the answer
We know what promotes well-being
In fact, policies like zero tolerance on child poverty or GDP alternatives
are exchanged already in WECO, a partnership of self-proclaimed well-being governments
Dozens of cities are piloting post-growth frameworks to operate within explicit social
and environmental boundaries with practices like universal basic incomes
I love how companies that put people and planet legally above profit generate billions each year
How communities are taking back stewardship of their commons with co-ops in renewable energy
water or food
Or how recent experiments with shorter work weeks for the same pay were so successful
that most of those companies made it permanent
We also have the technological capabilities, which will be pivotal once directed towards the right goal
This redirection is indispensable
But of course, I'm regularly told the techno-optimist argument that it's not
And I always respond
Let's say we could replace the dying bee colonies with robot pollinators
Why do that?
If we can also advance regenerative agriculture, which doesn't cause insecticide
Why dedicate our innovative powers to tree-planting drones?
When we can also use that thinking to redesign our economy so that existing forest isn't cut down
And that brings me to the other half of the answer to how probable a well-being economy is
It's promise
We'd have less stuff, but more of what we need
Connection
Maintaining a sense of community and purpose is hard in this current economic system
which treats us as selfish, never satisfied consumers
Research shows we're not just capable of caring for life, we derive joy and meaning from it
We can't be truly happy unless those around us thrive too
This economic transformation wouldn't be a capitulation to grim necessity
We'd want to do it even if we were not facing ecosystem collapse
Because a well-being economy fits much better who we want to be
And the world we long to live in
So, we started with these global problems and found that changing our economic system is imperative
But also feasible
And no sacrifice
But simply letting go of what's no longer serving us to find belonging
In a post-growth world of embraced interdependence
If that sounds spiritual, that's what a well-being economy delivers
Physical sufficiency, social abundance, and spiritual wealth
Including the peace of mind that this prosperity can last
Thank you
Thank you, Gaia
So, you spoke tonight about broader economic transformation
But what can we as individuals do?
Yes, you have to find your unique influence in the system
So, let's start by changing the system's narrative
We've been told the story of separation
We are selfish, violent beings doomed to exploit our commons
So, the best thing we can hope for, then, is technology to save us
So, you would have to start by working from a different narrative
The story of interdependence in which we are nature
Once our needs are securely met, we rejoice in contributing to this web of life that we're all part of
So, you talk about bringing it back to the personal level
That's actually very emotional work
It's deeply personal
But, of course, it cannot stay there
So, then, the next step is to build out this new narrative in the system's structures
And that very much depends on where you are
If you're in a corporation, look into regenerative business models
If you're in government, look into well-being government policies
If you're an investor, see if you can transition from ESG assessments, which are relative
to the absolute assessments against social foundations and planetary boundaries
If you're an entrepreneur, look into employee ownership
Everyone, citizens, buy at not-for-profit companies
See if community solar makes sense for you
So, there's so many things that you can do
But it very much depends on where you are
But there is one general piece of advice that I can give
And that's work together and remember that systems change is not linear
So, people do this very disjointly at first
And then, over time, they build connections until a critical minority mass is reached
Typically around 25% or so
And only then does the majority come along
Because the system change becomes self-reinforcing
Now, there's no guarantee that that will happen for the economic transformation that I'm proposing
But, if it does, it will have been because people like you and that are gathered here today
contributed to that change in their own unique way
So, thank you for listening
Thank you, Gaia